- [**`Set Operations`**](#set-operations)
- [**Union**](#union)
  - [**Union All**](#union-all)
  - [**Intersect**](#intersect)
  - [**Except**](#except)
  - [**Generalizations**](#generalizations)

# **`Set Operations`**

Let’s continue exploring table transformation through the union clause.

Unions allow us to utilize information from multiple tables in our queries. In this lesson, we’ll utilize data from an e-commerce store. Let’s explore the available data we’ll be using.

# **Union**
Sometimes, in order to answer certain questions based on data, we need to merge two tables together and then query the merged result. Perhaps we have two tables that contain information about products in an ecommerce store that we would like to combine.

There are two ways of doing this:

1. Merge the rows, called a join.
2. Merge the columns, called a union.
   
We’ll focus on unions here. Union combines the result of two or more `SELECT` statements, using the following syntax:
```
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table1
UNION
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table2;
```

Each `SELECT` statement within the `UNION` must have the same number of columns with similar data types. The columns in each `SELECT` statement must be in the same order. By default, the `UNION` operator selects only distinct values.

Suppose we are a growing ecommerce store and recently acquired another store to diversify our offering. The product data still exists in two separate tables: a `legacy_products` table and a `new_products` table. To get the complete list of product names from both tables, we can perform the following union.
```
SELECT item_name FROM legacy_products
UNION 
SELECT item_name FROM new_products;
```

## **Union All**
Great job! What if we wanted to allow duplicate values? We can do this by using the `ALL` keyword with `UNION`, with the following syntax:
```
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table1
UNION ALL
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table2;
```

In our ecommerce store, if we learned that we had records from historic order items in an additional table, we could use the following query to combine the tables for a complete analysis of sale price:
```
SELECT id, sale_price FROM order_items
UNION ALL
SELECT id, sale_price FROM order_items_historic;
```

Then we can perform an analysis on top of the combined result set, like finding the total count of order items.
```
SELECT count(*) FROM (
  SELECT id, sale_price FROM order_items
  UNION ALL
  SELECT id, sale_price FROM order_items_historic) as a;
```

## **Intersect**
`INTERSECT` is used to combine two `SELECT` statements, but returns rows only from the first `SELECT` statement that are identical to a row in the second `SELECT` statement. This means that it returns only common rows returned by the two `SELECT` statements.
```
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table1
 
INTERSECT
 
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table2;
```

For instance, we might want to know what brands in our newly acquired store are also in our legacy store. We can do so using the following query:
```
SELECT brand FROM new_products
 
INTERSECT
 
SELECT brand FROM legacy_products;
```

## **Except**
`EXCEPT` is constructed in the same way, but returns distinct rows from the first `SELECT` statement that aren’t output by the second `SELECT` statement.
```
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table1
 
EXCEPT
 
SELECT column_name(s) FROM table2;
```

Suppose we want to see if there are any categories that are in the new_products table that aren’t in the legacy_products table. We can use an `EXCEPT` query to perform this analysis:
```
SELECT category FROM new_products
 
EXCEPT
 
SELECT category FROM legacy_products;
```

## **Generalizations**
Congratulations! We just learned about Set Operations in SQL. What can we generalize so far?

- The `UNION` clause allows us to utilize information from multiple tables in our queries.
- The `UNION ALL` clause allows us to utilize information from multiple tables in our queries, including duplicate values.
- `INTERSECT` is used to combine two `SELECT` statements, but returns rows only from the first `SELECT` statement that are identical to a row in the second `SELECT` statement.
- `EXCEPT` returns distinct rows from the first `SELECT` statement that aren’t output by the second `SELECT` statement