- [**`DATE, NUMBER, AND STRING FUNCTIONS`**](#date-number-and-string-functions)
  - [**Date, Time and String Functions**](#date-time-and-string-functions)
  - [**Dates**](#dates)
  - [**Dates II**](#dates-ii)
  - [**Dates III**](#dates-iii)
  - [**Numbers**](#numbers)
  - [**Numbers II**](#numbers-ii)
  - [**Strings**](#strings)
  - [**Strings II**](#strings-ii)
  - [**Generalizations**](#generalizations)

# **`DATE, NUMBER, AND STRING FUNCTIONS`**

## **Date, Time and String Functions**
Oftentimes, data in columns of tables is not in the exact format we need to complete our desired analysis. We may need to extract a date from a full timestamp, manipulate a number, or combine first and last name columns to create a full name.

In this lesson, we’ll be learning about some of SQL’s built-in functions for transforming dates, numbers and strings. We’ll be using database of `bakeries` in this lesson.

It is important to note that date, number, and string functions are highly database dependent. Here, we focus on built-in functions in the SQLite database management system.

## **Dates**
We’ll begin with dates. Dates are often written in the following format

1. `Date`: YYYY-MM-DD

2. `Datetime` or `Timestamp`: YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss

We can use SQL’s date functions to transform data into a desired format. Since date functions can be database specific, verify the functions that exist on your relational database management system.

For example, this statement
```
SELECT DATETIME(manufacture_time)
FROM baked_goods;
```

Would return the date and time for the manufacture_time column.

## **Dates II**
Nice work! Now let’s assume that we have a column in our baked_goods table named manufacture_time in the format YYYY-MM-DD hh:mm:ss.

We’d like to know the number of baked_goods manufactured by day, and not by second. We can use the `DATE()` function to easily convert timestamps to dates and complete the following query:
```
SELECT DATE(manufacture_time), count(*) as count_baked_goods
FROM baked_goods
GROUP BY DATE(manufacture_time);
```

Similarly, we can query the time with
```
SELECT TIME(manufacture_time), 
        count(*) as count_baked_goods
FROM baked_goods
GROUP BY TIME(manufacture_time);
```

## **Dates III**
Given a datepart and a column of date or timestamp data type, we can increment date or timestamp values by a specified interval.

For example, in SQLite, the statement
```
DATETIME(time1, '+3 hours', '40 minutes', '2 days');
```

Would return a time 3 hours, 20 minutes, and 2 days after `time1`.

Imagine that each dessert in our `baked_goods` table is inspected 2 hours, 30 minutes, and 1 day after the manufacture time. To derive the inspection date for each baked good, we can use the following query
```
SELECT DATETIME(manufacture_time, '+2 hours', '30 minutes', '1 day') as inspection_time
FROM baked_goods;
```

## **Numbers**
Great work! Numeric functions can be used to transform numbers. Some common SQLite mathematical functions are included below that take numeric data types as inputs:

- `SELECT (number1 + number2);`: Returns the sum of two numbers. Similar, SQL can be used for subtraction, multiplication, and division.
- `SELECT CAST(number1 AS REAL) / number3;`: Returns the result as a real number by casting one of the values as a real number, rather than an integer.
- `SELECT ROUND(number, precision);`: Returns the numeric value rounded off to the next value specified.
In our `baked_goods` table, we have information about cost designated by `ingredients_cost`. For accounting purposes, we’d like to make sure that each ingredient cost is rounded to four decimal places rather than two, to account for currency fluctuations.
```
SELECT ROUND(ingredients_cost, 4) as rounded_cost
FROM baked_goods;
```

## **Numbers II**
A couple more useful numeric SQL functions are included below: `MAX` and MI`N.

`MAX(n1,n2,n3,...)`: returns the greatest value in the set of the input numeric expressions `MIN(n1,n2,n3,...)`: returns the least value in the set of the input numeric expressions

In our `baked_goods` table, in addition to the numeric `ingredients_cost` we have information about the packaging cost located in the `packaging_cost` column. We can use the MAX function to determine the overall greatest value of cost for each item using the following query:
```
SELECT id, MAX(ingredients_cost, packaging_cost)
FROM baked_goods;
```

## **Strings**
String manipulation can be useful to derive information from columns. We’ll cover a couple of the common string functions here.

A common use case for string manipulation in SQL is concatenation of strings. In SQLite, this is written as
```
SELECT string1 || ' ' || string2;
```

For example, the bakeries table contains both city and state columns. In order to create a route for these columns, we use the || function to concatenate them as in the following query:
```
SELECT city || ' ' || state as location
FROM bakeries;
```

String functions are again, very database specific, and it is best practice to consult documentation before proceeding.

## **Strings II**
Another useful string function in SQL is REPLACE():
```
REPLACE(string,from_string,to_string)
```

The function returns the string `string` with all occurrences of the string `from_string` replaced by the string `to_string`.

For example in `baked_goods`, there is a column named `ingredients`. The ingredients strings are formatted with underscores, such as `baking_soda` and `vanilla_extract`. To make these values more readable, we might like to replace the underscores with spaces. We can do so by using the following query:
```
SELECT id, REPLACE(ingredients,'_',' ') as item_ingredients
from baked_goods;
```

```
SELECT id, REPLACE(ingredients,'enriched_flour','flour') AS item_ingredients
FROM baked_goods;
```

## **Generalizations**
What can we generalize so far?

Date Functions:

- `DATETIME`: Returns the date and time of the column specified. This can be modified to return only the date or only the time.
- `DATETIME(time1, +X hours, Y minutes, Z days)`: Increments the specificed column by a given number of hours, minutes, or days.
  
Numeric Functions:

- `(number1 + number2);`: Returns the sum of two numbers, or other mathematical operations, accordingly.
- `CAST(number1 AS REAL) / number2;`: Returns the result as a real number by casting one of numeric inputs as a real number
- `ROUND(number, precision);`: Returns the numeric value rounded off to the next value specified.
  
String Functions:

- `'string1' || ' ' || 'string2';`: Concatenates string1 and string 2, with a space between.
- `REPLACE(string,from_string,to_string)`: Returns the string with all occurrences of the string `from_string` replaced by the string `to_string`.